seer_pipeline
=============

**Run seer with no headaches**

SEER is a very interesting tool to run GWAS on bacterial datasets, but
running it (especially on older OSes) requires using many different tools.

This pipeline allows running SEER with one go, thus reducing unnecessary headaches.

Usage
-----

Place the two required input files (`input.txt` and `phenotypes.txt`) in
the same directory as the Makefile. The `input.txt` file is a tab-delimited
two-columns file in the format:

    SAMPLE /PATH/TO/FASTA

While the `phenotypes.txt` file is a tab-delimited three columns file in the format:

    SAMPLE SAMPLE PHENOTYPE

Once you have your files ready, simply type:

    make seer

This will generate the k-mers using `fsm-lite`, estimate the population structure
using `mash` and the `R_mds.pl` script, and then run `seer` and `filter_seer` to
generate the list of significant kmers.

**NOTE:** the population structure final script `src/mash2mat` will strip
the `SAMPLE` name to the first `_` char. It is advisable then to have sample
names with no underscores (or modify the script).

The significant kmers can be mapped back to the annotated assemblies
(either in GFF or BED format), using the following command:

    make map

This will generate two fastq files (one for positive betas, one for negative ones),
align them to each assembly using `bowtie2` and `samtools`, and then output the
relevant features from the assembly using `bedtools`. This requires having the index
files for each assembly in the `../indexes` directory (generated by `bowtie2-build`),
and the assembly in GFF format in the `../gff` directory.

If you have your index files somewhere else simply type:

    make map INDEXESDIR=/path/to/indexes/directory

If you wish to use assemblies in BED format just type:

    make map GFFDIR=/path/to/bed/assemblies/directory GFFEXT=bed

The indexes and GFF/BED files should have the same naming scheme as the SAMPLE in
the input files; assemblies should have either the `.gff` or `.bed` extension, depending
on the value of your `GFFEXT` variable in the `Makefile`.

Prerequisites
-------------

* fsm-lite
* mash
* python (2.7+, 3.3+)
* pandas 
* perl
* R (3.2+)
* rhdf5
* seer
* bowtie2
* bedtools

Copyright
---------

Copyright (C) <2016> EMBL-European Bioinformatics Institute

This program is free software: you can redistribute it and/or
modify it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as
published by the Free Software Foundation, either version 3 of
the License, or (at your option) any later version.

This program is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. See the   
GNU General Public License for more details.

Neither the institution name nor the name seer_pipeline
can be used to endorse or promote products derived from
this software without prior written permission.
For written permission, please contact <marco@ebi.ac.uk>.

Products derived from this software may not be called seer_pipeline
nor may seer_pipeline appear in their names without prior written
permission of the developers. You should have received a copy
of the GNU General Public License along with this program.
If not, see <http://www.gnu.org/licenses/>.
